# NMOS Glossary
{:.no_toc}

- A markdown unordered list which will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents header" from above
{:toc}

In NMOS, several common terms have specific meanings that it helps to be aware of.
Many of these correspond to the glossary of the [JT-NM Reference Architecture][JT-NM RA].

Several of these are formally defined in NMOS specifications, for example in the [IS-04 Data Model](https://specs.amwa.tv/is-04/branches/v1.3.x/docs/Data_Model.html), but are described here for convenience.

## API

An Application Programming Interface provided over a protocol such as HTTP or WebSocket, defined in an AMWA NMOS Specification (IS-04, IS-05, IS-06, etc.).

## Client

The entity that is using an [API](#api), for example:

- a [Node](#node) using the IS-04 Registration API
- a monitoring application using the IS-04 Query API
- a connection control application using the IS-05 Connection API

The Client is distinct from the [User](#user).

## Controller

A Controller is [Client](#client) software that interacts with the NMOS [APIs](#api) to discover, connect and manage resources ([Nodes](#node), [Devices](#device), [Senders](#sender) and [Receivers](#receiver)) within a networked media system.

## Device

A Device is a logical block of functionality within a networked media infrastructure.
Examples of Devices include:

- Camera
- SDI to IP adapter
- Chroma keyer
- Audio mixer

A Device can have a permanent presence on its [Node](#node) (a fixed Device, e.g., a networked camera), or it can be created on demand by its Node (a virtual Device, e.g., a software-based transcoder).
Nodes can dynamically create different types of Device (a dynamic Device).

## Essence

Essence is video, audio or other data.

## Flow

In the IS-04 and IS-05 specifications a Flow refers to a sequence of [Essence](#essence) [Grains](#grain), that is video, audio or time-related data, generated by a [Source](#source).
A Source can generate multiplexed Flows consisting of more than one kind of Essence.

This is a relatively high-level usage of the word, not to be confused with a low-level flow within the physical network (distinguished as a Network Flow in the [IS-06 Data Model](https://specs.amwa.tv/is-06/branches/v1.0.x/docs/Data_Model.html)).

In addition to indicating the [format](https://specs.amwa.tv/nmos-parameter-registers/branches/main/formats) of its Source, a Flow identifies the media type and parameters of the particular rendition.

## Grain

NMOS uses Grain as a convenient way of identifying a unit of [Essence](#essence), that is video, audio or time-related data. This helps with mapping NMOS's logical data model onto physical Specifications.

For example, a video Grain could correspond to a frame of video.

## Node

A Node is a _logical_ host for [Devices](#device). This can be physical, or virtual (and a Node can be within a "cluster" or "cloud").

In [JT-NM TR-1001-1][JT-NM TR-1001-1], the [EBU Technology Pyramid][EBU Tech Pyramid], and other industry documents, the term Media Node is often used.

## Receiver

A Receiver consumes a [Flow](#flow) transmitted on the network by a [Sender](#sender).

A Receiver identifies the [transport](https://specs.amwa.tv/nmos-parameter-registers/branches/main/transports/) protocol it uses to communicate over the network
and the data [format](https://specs.amwa.tv/nmos-parameter-registers/branches/main/formats) it can accept.

## Registry

A Registry, or Registration & Discovery Instance, is a [Server](#server) that provides the IS-04 Registration API for [Nodes](#node) and the IS-04 Query API for [Controllers](#controller).

## Sender

A Sender makes a [Flow](#flow) available on the network.

A Sender identifies the [transport](https://specs.amwa.tv/nmos-parameter-registers/branches/main/transports/) protocol it uses to communicate over the network.

For example, a Sender could transmit an RTP stream according to a payload mapping for a specific video format, or a sequence of data [Grains](#grain) via the MQTT or WebSocket protocols.

## Server

The entity that is providing an [API](#api), for example:

- a [Registry](#registry) implementing IS-04 Registration and Query APIs
- a [Node](#node) implementing IS-04 Node API and IS-05 Connection API

## Source

A Source represents the _logical_ origin of any number of [Essence](#essence) [Flows](#flow), each of which is a rendition of the Source.

A Source therefore identifies the common [format](https://specs.amwa.tv/nmos-parameter-registers/branches/main/formats) of its Flows.

For example, a Source could generate Essence based on its [Device](#device)'s input signals, such as a camera image sensor, HDMI input signal, received RTP streams, or an internally generated test pattern or file read from storage, etc.

Note that a Source is:

- not a Device from which the content originates (for example there might be video, audio and perhaps data Sources _associated with_ a camera, the camera itself is the Device not a Source).
- not about the physical origin of the Flows (for example: two Flows associated with the same Source might physically originate from different hardware in distinct geographical locations).

## User

Where specifications refer to a User, this can include both human operators who drive a [Controller](#controller) manually and automation systems that drive a [Controller](#controller) programmatically.

[EBU Tech Pyramid]: https://tech.ebu.ch/pyramid "The Technology Pyramid For Media Nodes: Minimum User Requirements to Build and Manage an IP-Based Media Facility"
[JT-NM RA]: https://www.jt-nm.org/reference-architecture "Joint Task Force on Networked Media (JT-NM): Reference Architecture V1.0"
[JT-NM TR-1001-1]: https://www.jt-nm.org/tr-1001-1 "Joint Task Force on Networked Media (JT-NM): Technical Recommendation TR-1001-1:2020 v1.1: System Environment and Device Behaviors For SMPTE ST 2110 Media Nodes in Engineered Networks"
